but Perry thanks for joining us on this
special devoted to scandals of the
reagan-bush era we know that you as a
reporter for The Associated Press and
other organizations Newsweek were
involved very intimately in breaking the
iran-contra scandal and we want to spend
some time on that and why we don't know
perhaps as much as we should about that
scandal you are the author of a book
fooling America and one of the key
focuses of that book is you focus in on
what you call conventional wisdom in
Washington DC and how it seems to
undermine how a people's concern with
being in around undermines the nature of
the story the nature of how we hear
stories and what is or isn't reported so
let's talk a little bit about just life
in Washington and what it means this
conventional wisdom has meant to some of
these scandals that you have attempted
to report but first of all why don't you
define a little bit about what you mean
by conventional wisdom well I would say
that Washington is a place of great
conformity it's a city where people want
to be respected want to be seen as
insiders want to be seen as the kind of
people that can get jobs and beasts and
get to the right parties be be respected
that's very important part of being a
reporter in Washington a congressman in
Washington a bureaucrat in Washington a
lobbyist in Washington so with that
there's this great danger that when you
go against the grain when you're a
maverick when you take on powerful
interests when you challenge what the
official story is the official truth is
that you become a person who steps
outside of the acceptable parameters
that you're no longer taken seriously
your career may be put in jeopardy if
your member of Congress you'll be
considered a lightweight a flake you're
not part of the club
so in in Washington there is this almost
a canoe and in forestry Alan
on people which I would call the
conventional wisdom it's a consensus of
of the most the most powerful and
influential people in the city if you
take that that kind of phony or enforced
reality on you run tremendous risks for
yourself if you're a member of Congress
say in the case of when John Kerry back
in the mid 80s took on the iran-contra
then then known as the North Network's
story he was ridiculed as believing
these crazy conspiracy theories he was
discredited for for trusting witnesses
who were just lowlife mercenaries he was
attacked by what we now know or
manufactured prosecutorial reports say
from Florida which which claim there was
nothing to this even when the
investigators were actually discovering
in Florida that there was a great deal
to these North allegations he suffered
badly in terms of his career in terms of
his reputation he did this had the same
problem on the contra drug story when he
was insisting about that there was
strong evidence of that that was not
part of the official reality of
Washington it was not part of the
conventional wisdom and to go against
that kind of enforced reality is not the
kind of thing that most people in
Washington will do because they have to
care about their jobs about but being
influential inside the political
structures of the city so often the
truth is left behind in favor of of
being being part of the club I've heard
it said that from editors and publishers
and haunches and networks that the
reason that there is an investigative
reporting one more investigative
reporting is not because people are
afraid of stories but it just costs too
much money we're not afraid of being
cast out we just can't afford to do it
anymore
well there probably is something to that
I think investigative reporting can be
expensive and somewhat risky there was I
believe a strategy undertaken in the
post-watergate period by by political
groups I say particularly on the
conservative side who were hostile
to reporting that was exposing
wrongdoing like Watergate part of that
strategy was to mount aggressive libel
actions against journalists who stepped
outside the bounds CBS for instance on
the Westmoreland case and by driving the
costs of the perceived cost of
investigative reporting up through those
kinds of proceedings that had an effect
on intimidating publishers and editors
but I would say beyond that there really
is a great fear and timidity on the part
of editors and publishers much of many
of the stories that we were doing on the
North Network operations the Contra
drugs were not stories that were going
to lead you into particular libel
situations these rant about actions of
the US government the concern there was
that that the news organizations pushing
these stories forward would be attacked
and in and on an individual basis the
reporter who was crazy enough to try to
get at the truth on these would be
singled out and attacked and there
developed a whole bureaucracy in
Washington during that period called
public diplomacy which was designed by
the White House with a specific intent
of raising the price for people who were
not going along with the official story
now could you talk a little bit more
about that structure you talked a little
bit about in your book about this
structure created as Reagan came in
Reagan Bush came in to make sure that
conventional wisdom was what they felt
it to be and how they went about
enforcing the situation so that things
came out looking at the way they wanted
them to lunk
well for those of us who were doing
these kinds of stories throughout the
80s it was something that we were aware
of
you could almost not be unaware of it at
The Associated Press I was assigned to
their special assignment team with the
transition from Carter to Reagan so I
was so I was doing investigative
reporting in that sense from the very
beginning of the Reagan era those of us
who would take on some of the miss
statements of President Reagan
that news conferences would find
ourselves under attacks as the news
organizations did AP and after the first
news conference that reagan put on did a
story about a number of factual errors
AP was then severely counter-attacked by
david gergen and others through the
media there are also groups like
accuracy in media conservative pressure
groups which were specifically designed
to intimidate reporters in the news
media from exposing problems like errors
of fact by the President or actions he
was taking that they liked but the
public was being was they were being
sheltered from the public so as the 80s
got underway this was more or less ad
hoc there were efforts to attack certain
journalists Rae Bonner for instance when
he was exposing desk one activity by
American Allied forces in El Salvador
he came under severe and coordinated
attack by the US Embassy in El Salvador
by the White House here the State
Department and by these conservative
pressure groups the attacks became so
intense that ultimately the New York
Times withdrew him and his career
basically ended at the New York Times so
there were those ad hoc kind of
approaches but then we saw beginning
around 80 to 83 a much more coordinated
strategy and from the documents that
came out during the iran-contra hearings
we now know a good deal about that and I
go into an in my book at great length
there was a strategy called public
diplomacy and one of the fathers of that
strategy was William Casey who was then
at CIA in 83 case he had some serious
problems the Contra operation was not
working as he'd intended the plans to
overthrow the Sandinistas in Nicaragua
by the end of 83 which was the original
timetable were obviously pie-in-the-sky
the Contras were committing a large
number of atrocities which Congress is
beginning to look into and becoming
concerned about so Casey had to in a
sense shape the image of the Contras in
Washington even more importantly than in
the field he had to make them seem more
effective and one level
that's one reason they did some of the
mining Zinat coastal attacks that were
actually done by CI personnel but
instead of it being acknowledged by CIA
the Contras were supposed to claim false
falsely credit for those operations then
in Washington Casey and others at the
White House put together a public
diplomacy apparatus they brought over
from CIA Walter Raymond who was the top
propagandist at CIA for a number of
years he'd been there he had a long long
career at the agency running propaganda
and disinformation he was put in charge
of this domestic program at the National
Security Council because the CIA is by
law prohibited from influencing American
policies and politics so he wasn't in
effect externalized from the CIA as we
saw North was later in a similar fashion
so you had so you had this operation
built inside the NSC which had an office
at the State Department run by me a man
named Otto Reich who was a
cuban-american who was extremely
aggressively conservative on these kinds
of issues and they went around trying to
intimidate journalists and their editors
and their news executives around
Washington whenever her story appeared
that they didn't like the reporters and
editors could expect a lengthy visit
where every detail in the story would be
challenged the reporters objectivity
would be questioned they'd be pressure
on unedited to reassign the reporter
there was also a strategy which they
called controversial izing reporters
that is by dragging a reporter into the
story and making him sort of part of it
by saying he was biased and sophal by
attacking him publicly
you could controversial eyes the
reporter and therefore convince his
editor that he could no longer be an
objective reporter therefore he had to
be pulled so you had a variety of
strategies like that could you give an
example of perhaps a reporter yourself
or somebody who was marginalized like
that what happened to a lot of us and
there are some rather I think rather
shocking examples there was one when
john'll antigua of the washington post
was like a stringer for them in
in in Central America was doing stories
out of Nicaragua which were quite
accurate but which the administration
didn't like the story was put out
through the public diplomacy office and
through accuracy and media that LAN
Tigua and others other reporters in in
Managua were accepting prostitutes from
the Sandinistas and and reich added this
little touch that that for for gay
reporters the Sandinistas were providing
men it was it was the kind of thing you
do to somebody and you and therefore
when you put this out publicly you make
it harder for them to do their jobs
quite obviously the next time they they
do a story their editors are gonna be
more suspect even if they don't believe
the allegations it's out there the
reporter has to deny them the pressure
on the reporter then becomes to then
prove that he is not in the Sandinistas
pocket so to speak so he then has to
attack the Sandinistas perhaps it
perhaps do journalism that's not
accurate that maybe is is more biased
because he has to prove himself back to
Washington that he's really an anti
sandanista kind of fellow these were
very sophisticated public relations
tactic somewhat somewhat crude but in
many ways sophisticated there were also
attempts on the case of my colleague at
The Associated Press during in the
mid-80s Brian Barger I received a call
from someone on the public diplomacy
staff at state who tried to convince me
that Barger was a sandanista agent it
was the kind of thing they were
whispering about us around the city I
demanded evidence it turned out they
didn't have any they threw the I threw
out something he said interestingly that
Barger had done pieces for Pacifica and
that that meant that he was somehow a
sandanista agent I said well no he
actually did if he actually did some
stories for Pacific News Service which
is a different organization they then
said that he had worked for Karen to
young at the Washington Post and they
didn't like Karen DeYoung because
reported on the Sandinistas taking power
in 79 and which was true but Karen
DeYoung was that was the foreign editor
when Barger was a staffer an editorial
assistant on the foreign desk it didn't
mean anything but these were but by
saying this whispering these kinds of
accusations even when they had
absolutely no basis the effect was to
frighten reporters and if you didn't
frighten them to raise questions about
are you also getting back to this this
crew and sort of putting the CIA in
place essentially to do domestic policy
you talked in your book about de Raymond
and the the desire to I think you called
it black adding white having in black
heading making the good in the bed very
clear the black and the white very
precise well of course when you ask
these people in the in the in the Reagan
Bush administration's about this they
deny they were doing propaganda but the
documents that we had show that Raymond
had had a special set of marching orders
for his staff and they were to glue in
his words glue black hats on the
Sandinistas and to glue white hats on
the Contras now this is in a sense the
almost a definition of propaganda if
your instructions were let's get the
truth out fellas the American people
deserve it you wouldn't be telling them
to glue black hats on one side and to
glue white hats on the other they
understood that this was a case where
both sides were in gray hats that there
was a lot of ambiguity about this that
the the issue was much more complicated
but they did not want to present it to
the American people in that way they
were doing what they call perception
management and the idea was that if they
could manage the perceptions of Central
America among the American people and
particularly among the elite in
Washington they could then shape their
policies and and get approval for the
war efforts they were undertaking by
putting out essentially
distorted or false information and that
worked for them they they did not really
care about the reality in Central
America they cared about the perception
of reality among the the elite in
Washington and by attacking anyone who
disagreed with them and marginalizing
those people they helped build a
conventional wisdom or a consensus in
Washington that was that looked the
other way when the Contras committed
atrocities and flew into a rage when the
Sandinistas did it became a very
one-sided approach and some of the
accusations against the Sandinistas
turned out to be utterly made-up hold
off would this be the same organization
that operated for instance around the
case of Barry seal who was working with
the DEA and was about to according to
the DEA participated in a major bust
relating to Colombian traffickers and
apparently the Reagan administration
wants to show that drug trafficking was
going on in Nicaraguan so do you know
this story does this come to door yes
this was an example I was just about to
raise the there were a number of public
relations propaganda strategies running
against the Sandinistas many of them
were completely false one of them was
this one this this allegation which
wrote arose in 1984 that the Sandinistas
were shipping cocaine to the United
States and that it was poisoning
American youth as President Reagan said
in one of his public addresses well what
happened there is that in reality the
Drug Enforcement Administration did not
have a single shred of evidence that the
Sandinista leadership was doing any such
thing what they did do and this was a
joint White House CIA operation was that
they they arranged to have a shipment of
cocaine put on a plane the c-123 that
was flown by Barry seal who was a DEA
informant he flew it into Nicaragua the
plane was
was shot down then another plane was
brought in to pick up to transfer the
cocaine from one plane to the other and
was flown out although this was part of
a larger operation aimed at major drug
traffickers in South America the White
House and CIA leaked this information to
the press particularly to the Washington
Times and it and was made into a major
story about the Sandinista leadership
being involved in drug trafficking there
was one man named federico vaughn who
was a very shady character no one quite
knows who he was working for but
apparently he had some ties to the
Sandinista government but he also
according to later evidence was making
his phone calls to the United States
about this from either the u.s. embassy
phone or the phone of another western
country so the who exactly mr. Vaughn
was working for was never made entirely
clear but it was a very effective
propaganda ploy the DEA has acknowledged
later that he did not have a single bit
of evidence tying any other sandanista
official to drug trafficking they were
aware of not a single shipment of
cocaine from Nicaragua to the United
States during this period and and that
is not because I think the Sandinistas
weren't particularly moral people i but
it was it had to do a great deal with
the economics of the matter it would be
an it would be absolutely certifiably
insane for a drug smuggler from South
America to move his drugs through
Nicaragua to the United States for a
couple reasons one the US had imposed a
strict trade embargo on Nicaragua and
was not allowing shipments to come in of
many sorts and secondly the US had
Nicaraguan are extremely close
surveillance there was the there was the
the destroy in Washington that if a
toilet flushed in Nicaragua the CIA knew
about it so you had so you had really no
logical reason for these shipments to go
through Nicaragua they went instead
through Costa Rica Honduras and in other
countries in the region but the DEA
acknowledged that none of them went
through
girag with as far as they knew and in
fact they were quite disturbed because
this did this desire to nail the the
Sandinistas did screw up a major drug
operation
right the the the drug operation which
was aimed at some of the top cocaine
traffickers in in in Colombia was
disrupted by this by this propaganda
ploy which was essentially false but had
a very telling effect on the American
image again gluing black hats on the
Sandinistas this is Janice Bronstein
were speaking with Bob Perry he's the
author of fooling America and this is a
special devoted to scandals of the
reagan-bush era well this brings us back
to your book again and let me ask you
this question
one is this sort of typical policy and
how does this desire to alter
conventional wisdom and make policy how
look as the way a particular
administration wants it to look how does
that undermine our democracy you know
this is a sort of a speculative question
and what impact does it have on
democracy with a small thing well
democracy I think has to be defined as
as an informed electorate having a say
in the actions of their government if
the electorate is dis informed or
uninformed democracy is diminished and
int and potentially made meaningless I
think if one could look at it a
totalitarian state for instance which
had complete control over the
information flow and prevented any
honest information from getting out and
then still had elections the elections
wouldn't really amount to much obviously
that's not the case here but the degree
to which the federal government the
executive branch was able to mislead the
public to provide false information
misleading information propaganda if you
will to the public democracy is
diminished the public cannot be expected
to
in an informed manner if the government
is dis informing it do you believe that
this policy has changed the way in which
journalists work in a permanent way do
you think this is really altered the
nature of journalism and investigative
reporting and journalists desire to get
to the truth yes I don't think that
you'll see in Washington at least it's
hard to say what will happen in the new
administration but I think what we've
seen happen over the last 12 years in
Washington is is almost a fear a terror
almost among journalists to go against
the prevailing wisdom the conventional
wisdom or against what the government
what the White House wants reported too
many people have had their careers badly
damaged too many people have been
literally purged from our profession
many of the many of the journalists who
succeeded in the 80s who are now
reaching positions as bureau chiefs or
news executives did so because they
intentionally avoided taking on the
government they do not want to that they
were they had so little commitment to
finding out the truth that they were
willing to play along with some of the
most obvious lies of this past era so
they're now in a position to do the
hiring the firing the decisions on
assignments the decisions on what
stories are worth pursuing so in a sense
you've elevated a kind of a yuppie
journalism to positions of power in
Washington you're not finding the bill
Kovach's these days bill Kovich was the
bureau chief for the New York Times for
many years went on to the Atlanta
Constitution and was eventually sort of
pushed out of the profession he had
fought for some of the most important
stories that came out in the 70s out of
the New York Times Bureau he was one of
the people that supported sy Hersh and
sy Hirsch is heroic work during that era
you're not finding people like that
anymore
in fact you're finding people who care
about their careers so much that they
would not jeopardize them by doing tough
journalism all right let's
a little bit about tough journalism Bob
Perry let's backtrack a little bit and
talking some depth about iran-contra and
what happened with the story how you
discovered it attempted to get it out
and then what happened in the aftermath
of that and you did do some great work
on unraveling the Oliver North Network
what was going on and I guess it was a
basement office of the the it wasn't the
White House it was the the National
Security Council why don't you start by
just giving us as precise as you can but
a definition of what you think
iran-contra was you know what kind of
scandal was it and what was it about
well I think iran-contra is it probably
a good way of looking at it it's a good
term for this although I think one has
to see it broadly a bit like you might
see Watergate covering a whole range of
abuses in the seventies not just the
break-in iran-contra I should cover many
of the abuses in the early 80s which
involved you know a war that was being
fought illegally in Nicaragua covert
operations being run throughout Central
America much many of them in defiance of
the laws rules being bent or broken in
terms of sending military equipment to
Guatemala at a time when its military
was widely understood to be engaged in
serious human rights violations the same
in El Salvador where major atrocities
were covered up because it would not
help the political situation in
Washington if they were acknowledged the
el mozote a massacre being perhaps the
clearest case in terms of in Nicaragua
you had the supporting of a group of
insurgents the Contras who engaged
almost systematically in in abuses human
rights abuses raping of women even their
own women troops they were involved in
shipments of drugs they they they
engaged in just what almost has to be
called terrorism and in fact there was a
Defense Intelligence Agency report
early on which labeled the contras a
terrorist organization so so you had all
that happening to be hidden from the
American people the American people
weren't gonna support model commanders
in the contra forces who were raping
their own women soldiers at knifepoint
has happened they weren't going to
support mowing down of farm workers in
the fields of Nicaragua so all that had
to be covered up and we had put in place
then this idea the public diplomacy
operation to conceal it - to push our
hot buttons on on questions about the
Sandinistas where their fault could be
exaggerated sometimes even invented so
we had all this sort of this general
atmosphere of deception going on and so
it was perhaps understandable almost
natural that when Congress finally
stepped in and said enough is enough
you're not going to get any more money
for these programs after the
particularly after the mining of the
Nicaraguan harbors were exposed and this
was that was a case where we were the
United States was clearly in direct
violation of international law
ultimately the World Court would even
condemn us for it but Congress finally
stepped in but instead of accepting the
law even though we signed it President
Reagan chose to circumvent it to flout
it and he turned as we know to his
National Security Council staff
particularly Colonel North to carry out
this continued war policy let's talk a
little bit about how you discovered
Oliver North and how you attempted to go
about getting out the word and what
happened when you started to talk about
this story well I when I first when I
started doing the investigative work for
AP in 1880 late eighties early 81 I
focused on Central America as one topic
I thought would be very hot I thought
they'd be a lot going on there and was
worth covering in doing that mostly on
El Salvador at first and also dealing
with some intelligence policies as they
were evolving in the early Reagan years
I I came upon
a fairly junior man at the time named
Oliver North and I first met him
personally in 1983 there was we had a we
had lunch together at the hay-adams
restaurant in in Washington not far from
the White House and North was quite
clearly a very articulate ambitious
fellow I could even tell that in a brief
meeting he carried he conveyed a great
deal of energy excitement for what he
was doing why did he want to have lunch
with a reporter when he was busy
constructing this huge and illegal
Network well at this point this is
before that this is 83 but he was
already north was very effective in
manipulating the press people don't
realize that he made himself a source
for a number of journalists and by doing
so he got a number of them to protect
him so when he was even when his the
stories were beginning to come out about
his activities many news organizations
would not write them because he was
considered a valued source of
information and he also understood the
importance of propaganda so if he could
put out his side of the story on
background or off-the-record to
reporters there was a tendency to it
it's not only ingratiate himself with
the reporters but get them to carry his
water so it worked worked both ways so
you were talking about this me so in
this at this lunch he was he was started
telling this story at that time I was
with another person that was a
conservative activist who would help set
the lunch up and and and the end
commander shuffle burger had recently
been killed in in in El Salvador he was
the deputy military commander for the
for the US military group in El Salvador
and he had been assassinated by the
rebels and in that context north began
talking about how he and Shuffle burger
just a short time before had been flying
around El Salvador in a Piper Cub and
had heard about a battle under
way down below and and and landed the
plane to get a with Aikens what he
called a fast after-action report and
the plane supposedly landed and north
and shuffle burger hop down and the
battle was still going on this was at a
time one has to remember when US
military personnel in El Salvador were
barred from getting or anywhere near a
battlefield at least that's what they
were technically is not supposed to be
doing so north and shuffle burger then
find a couple of Salvadoran soldiers
were wounded and put them back on the on
the plane and as North described it
shuffle burger was giving CPR to one of
the guys in the back of the and North
was trying to get the plane up in the
air and he said a gorilla hopped out
from behind a bush and opened fire and
blew the windshield out but he was able
to you know make takeoff speed on this
little dirt road and and he flew the
plane back to ill upon go airfield and
one of the guys died on the plane and
the other Salvadoran soldier died at the
airfield so he took the story back to
Ronald Reagan as an anecdote about the
need for more military medical
assistance for El Salvador and and
Reagan had in fact waived the the true
pull of the 52 advisor limit in El
Salvador to permit more more medical
training so I couldn't write the story
because I first eyes didn't know I
should believe it in fact I really
didn't believe it and shuffle burger was
dead it was it was it wasn't virtually
impossible to confirm but it became
clear to me that this was a man who was
worth keeping an eye on and as the
troubles grew for the Contra program we
began to hear very early since at that
time the coverage where I was doing and
others a few others were doing was very
close to to the people who were actually
making the policy we knew real-time what
was happening with that program and one
of the things we started hearing was
that North was stepping in to sort of
fill the void left by the forced removal
of the CIA person
so that became something we were aware
of and even as the the period of 84
we're on and and at that point I was
doing I did the stories about the CIA
manuals the sabotage manual and also the
that's what became known as the
assassination manual let's let's talk
about those what those manuals were and
who was creating them and what people
thought when you started to report about
those I mean you know it's hard to
believe that the CIA was providing the
Contras with manuals to create martyrs
and so on and so forth well I think
that's that's right it was but when I
was remember when these things happened
in 1983 the summer of 83 was a key
period for the whole Contra operation
Casey realized that the war was not
going to be won easily the original
plans for the victory by Christmas of 83
those plans were out the window he
needed to go in for the long haul he
needed a better trained contra force he
needed more trouble for the Sandinistas
at home more economic dislocation more
sabotage more problems so the two
manuals were drafted in that time period
the one one was the comic book style
manual which which urged the Nicaraguans
to put put tacks on the roadways to
cause tires to blow out to put sponges
and toilets to make toilets back up
qualen sick from work a whole variety
throwing Molotov cocktails and police
buildings and so forth a whole variety
of how to sort of mess up a country and
they also they also was the
psychological operations manual was put
together for the contra units to make
them more effective at putting out their
message and much of it was fairly
innocuous of that sort of you know how
you make a fact of speech how use
propaganda but some of it was more
sinister you know how you create a
martyr by having one of your own people
get killed in a demonstration against
the Sandinistas and then using that
person's death
rather coldly and calculatingly to
enhance your cause and of course the
most controversial part was how you use
selective violence to neutralize
sandanista civilian officials like
judges or town officials and this was
being this was being done at a time
remember when when the Contras were
executing on a fairly massive scale
captured civilian officials some people
felt that one of the reasons for the
manual was in a sense to get control of
the Contras you know in other words was
better to use selective violence than
indiscriminate violence so you know so
it was argued at the time when it was
exposed in 84 that this was really a
human rights initiative to prevent the
Contras from being too too violent
toward these toward these civilian
officials but but that was part of the
of the overall package as we came to
know it and these were embarrassing
disclosures when they came out in 84
they followed the disclosures about the
mining I also wrote stories during this
period about the sabotage raids along
the coast the town of Corinne toe was
virtually destroyed when when CIA
personnel landed and blew up the oil
depot there were tax on a number of oil
pipelines there was an effort to destroy
the Sandinistas the Nicaraguan economy
to make it scream as we might have said
in a different historical context and
this was carried out very aggressively
throughout this period when these things
were exposed
obviously it added to the pressure from
in Congress to get it to get some handle
on this I also wrote in late 84 about
how CIA helicopter teams where I had
actually engaged in combat with
Nicaraguan forces in early 84 @potus II
and at Puerto cindino if I remember
right so we had situations where
American military men were in combat in
Nicaragua and the effort was to contain
and cover it all up keep it from the
American people and that of course was
part of this this knee this desperate
need to control this false reality in
Washington
now this reporting that you were doing
and some others were doing what a long
way to encourage the Congress to
restrain what was going on
in Nicaragua in Central America that was
the I believe the origins of the Boland
Amendment well yes I think the Boland
amendment was driven by several things
first the recognition of increasing
human rights problems by the Contras and
this the expansion of the unit of the
force remember Casey was first sent
telling people that this was just to
interdict weapons going to El Salvador
but it became clear to Congress that the
real goal was something else and it was
inside CI records I reported during this
timeframe
there was actually a timetable a plan
for overthrowing the Nicaraguan
government this was this I reported this
at a time when the official story was
still that this that the goal of the
Contras was to introduce and possibly
put some pressure on the Nicaraguans the
real goal was to impose a new government
so so Congress did begin to get more and
more concerned in more and more
distrustful and took action that forced
the White House's hand and it moved to
setting up this private network okay
we're talking with Bob Perry author of
fooling America early on he was a
journalist working with Associated Press
and then with Newsweek breaking stories
around the whole iran-contra scandal now
Bob Perry this is a scandal that had a
number of CIA station Chiefs involved in
it it had Alan fires I believe he was
the Central American Task Force chief
it had the deputy director of covert
operations Claire George involved it had
everybody knows William Casey could
still be raising money from his grave
for the contrasts he was clearly hands
on as you've talked about Nez it's
common knowledge now
so and you have the support the CIA was
getting the support of the NSA through
these safe communication systems you had
the DIA involved this was an extensive
intelligence operations operation why
wasn't that when finally it came to the
congressional investigation there was it
was almost as if the CIA didn't even
participate well I think iran-contra can
be seen as a series of cover-ups
obviously we talked about how the some
of the abuses by the Contras had to be
covered up
then when North's operations sort of
took over raising money and providing
military assistance as you point out
with many CIA people collaborating and
assisting him that had to be covered up
because that was in violation of the law
when finally after enormous amounts of
work a few of us were began to expose
North's operation now we're in 1985 and
that's my due the first story about
identifying north and his operation the
Miami Herald is a piece shortly after
that which makes similar points but it's
widely ignored there is there is a
flurry in August of 85 where the New
York Times as a piece without mentioning
Norse name the post matches it the
washington post matches it so these
things are out there but the cover-up
continues these things are denied
they're not denied aggressively and
attacked aggressively we keep right at
AP we keep reporting on it at this point
Brian Barger has been brought on board
at ap to work on these stories with me
we're making a determined effort to
expose this story although obviously the
AP had its moments were tried to pull
back and didn't want to go as
aggressively as we thought it should we
were doing some major stories throughout
this period on aspects of this operation
that goes into 86 and we find out an 86
that in fact the the US Attorney's
Office in Miami was also on to the north
Network
that's that investigation was was
kiboshed by the summer of 86 we do
another major story on north laying out
with 24 sources how he used
intermediaries how he continued these
opera this this contra support activity
in defiance of the law in August of 86
in the face of all this reporting the
House Intelligence Committee chaired by
Lee Hamilton at the time then goes over
rather grudgingly I think to the White
House he sits down with north in the
Situation Room and asks him are these
stories right nor says they're not they
they're totally false other of Nohr
superiors at the White House also deny
it and in the House Intelligence
Committee then comes back and I get a
call telling me that we've checked your
stories out and they're not right
these respectable men have denied them
at that point and people sort of forget
this I think at that point the the North
story was dead
Barger at this point is sort of just
because he denied it well because the
Democrats had now joined the White House
the CIA in the State Department denying
these stories these were considered
flaky conspiracy theories at that time
and to have Lee Hamilton and the
Democrats say these aren't true put
those of us who were trying to get at
the truth in an extremely difficult
untenable position Barger's pushed out
at the AP at this time he goes into
freelancing I give up
really trying to do anything as as as
other reporters working on our also pull
back it is it is the conventional wisdom
in Washington is so strong that these
are all nutty stories that you would
throw away your career if you pursued
them any further and in fact I try that
summer to get a number of publications
including some that are considered sort
of liberal like Rolling Stone to run
stories in this and no one wanted even
here it was considered completely off
the charts
Bob Perry why don't you just tell people
exactly what the Bohemian Grove is well
the Bohemian Grove is an exclusive
resort in Northern California which
every year has several weekends when
some of the most prominent men in
America get together with great privacy
and meat there's a play that's put on
the last weekend of the thing there are
three weekends normally there's a play
that's put on it's a chance for the
great and powerful to sort of let down
their hair and and talk freely about
things that are of concern to them the
the house task force accepts as fact
that William Casey was at the Bohemian
Grove on the last weekend in July 1980
and that therefore he could not have
gone to a meeting in Madrid as described
by John sheet Hashemi who was a who was
an Iranian arms dealer an ex-cia
operative the basic argument for the
Bohemian Grove alibi is laid out by the
by the task force is that Casey was
there from on July 25th 26th and 27th
that he then leaves the Grove on the on
July 27th goes to San Francisco and
flies to London where we know he arrives
on July 28th for a a world war two
historical conference he arrives there
at about 4:00 p.m. in the afternoon so
the committee says that because of that
travel itinerary the stories about
Madrid must be a lie therefore this is
untrue but there are some serious
problems with his alibi and basically
the problem is that all the documentary
evidence establishes that Casey was
actually at the Bohemian Grove August
1st to 3rd and was not there all on the
west coast even the last weekend in July
and the story goes this way
Daryl Trent who was a Republican
activist in 80 in Casey's host at the
Bohemian Grove of that year is in whilst
Angeles on July 24th that's the Thursday
he recalls flying on July 21st to San
Francisco and then going to the Grove
he believes Casey was with him he's not
sure if it was that weekend or the
following weekend but he thinks it was
that weekend there are at the Grove we
have now us dated bar tabs and time bar
tabs where which Darryl trended signs
showing that indeed he was there on July
24th
however Casey could not have gone with
him on the 24th Casey was in Washington
at the Federal Election Commission on
camera picking up a matching fund check
for the campaign
there are also documents showing that on
that day Casey was at the Metropolitan
Club in Washington making phone calls
there are bills time dated bills for
this so Casey was here in Washington not
in Los Angeles or San Francisco that day
the next day Friday July 25th Darrell
Trent stays at the Grove he has some
more bar bar tabs he went skeet shooting
that day Casey has two meetings on his
calendar that take place at the
Republican headquarters in Arlington
Virginia in the morning of that Friday
although the task force has no evidence
that Casey flew to the west coast at all
they found they found a receipt a
canceled plane ticket for the Washington
to New York shuttle on that Friday
bought by Casey it's one of those
tickets that you buy actually when
you're getting on the plane so what they
had was documentary evidence that he
went from Washington to New York when he
should have been already at the Bohemian
Grove on the next day July 26 the
Saturday Casey has another meeting
scheduled with a woman named Tobin this
apparently is Mary Jane Tobin who was in
New York based right-to-life advocate
advocate and she confirms meeting with
Casey at his home in Long Island Rosalyn
Harbor Long Island so the evidence is
consistent and clear based on documents
that Casey was actually on the East
Coast during this time period there's
also a photograph that was taken of all
the people a group photograph of people
who were at the parsonage encampment at
the Bohemian Grove on this last weekend
in July
Darrell Trent's there some other people
friends of cases are there William Casey
is not in the photograph so there's no
evidence at all that Casey was at the
Bohemian Grove when the house task force
insists he was the house task force
further has no evidence at all that he
flew out of San Francisco there are no
plane tickets no credit card receipts
nothing to place him on a plane from San
Francisco to London this is entirely
speculation on their part however the
following weekend August 1st
Casey's calendar puts him in Los Angeles
there were notes that were taken by
Richard Allen of a meeting that day in
Los Angeles would show that Casey and
Daryl Trent is Bohemian Grove hosts were
sitting together so while it was
impossible based on the documentary
record for Casey to travel with with
Daryl Trent from Los Angeles to San
Francisco the previous week the two of
them are together in Los Angeles on
August 1st so it's clear that that's
when they would have gone on August 1st
Darrell Trent arrives at the Bohemian
Grove Casey is charged for Bohemian
Grove playbook for the play they put on
on August 1st
uh and then to top this all off there's
a contemporaneous diary entry by one of
the people who stayed within that same
cabin man named Matthew McGowan who was
a San Francisco businessman and Matthew
McGowan who had been there who recorded
each day he was at the Grove that summer
writes on August 3rd the last day of the
Grove encampment that the Grove closed
that day and that land that Governor
Reagan's campaign manager William Casey
was our guest this last weekend and even
the House report acknowledges that on
its face McGowan's diary entry
would establish the case he was there
that weekend but regardless the House
Task Force says we conclude that Casey
was there the last weekend in July and
therefore could not have been in Madrid
and to do that they do two things well
first of all they of course they throw
out all the documentary evidence all of
it has to be false they say that the the
bar tabs for July 24th that Daryl Trent
sign must have been an error they say
that that that case he must have stepped
out of going for a walk when the
photograph was taken
they say Casey must have canceled all
his meetings for those two days which
put him on the East Coast they go
through and just throw out all the
documentary evidence as convincing as it
is then they say well Daryl Trent
recalled that Casey was heading to
London when he drives him to the airport
in San Francisco and they make a big
deal out of this except they also
mention in footnote 218 of the report if
you bother to read the footnotes the
context Darryl trans testimony was that
he wasn't sure if he actually recalled
the London reference that Casey had said
it or if he just heard it recently and
was adding it to his memory so in other
words Gerald Trent acknowledges that he
might have just factored in the London
story because he heard about it recently
not that it was said at the time by
Casey this is stuck in a footnote that
one has to sort of dig around to find
there's also a claim that there's this
another person who's at the Grove that
weekend Bernard Smith says he recalls
seeing Casey with Gerald Trent and Daryl
and Smith was there just that one
weekend in the last weekend in July
however what they don't tell you in the
report is that is that Smith Trenton
Casey we're all back at the Grove in
1981 together so Smith's memory could
very easily have been just a year off
and that's the kind of that's the kind
of thing you would not remember
precisely and there's no and Smith has
no notes or anything to verify what year
it was
so what the committee did was to be
extremely selective in the evidence that
they considered conclusive when that
evidence was actually very flimsy and
dismissive when they were faced with
really incontrovertible documentary
evidence because of this pattern
congressman diamond Lee of Los Angeles
was a Democrat from Los Angeles objected
and wrote a dissent to this report
saying that he felt the the treatment of
the evidence was selective and
imbalanced congressman Hamilton put
pressure on Diamond Lee to get him true
withdraw the dissent which diamond Lee
finally did Diamond Lee refused to sign
the report because of his concerns about
the selective use of evidence so I think
we what you have here is a report that
may have some very good points in it and
it may actually much of it I might agree
with in terms of criticizing some of the
the witnesses who made allegations but I
think the report itself damages its
credibility by taking on these alibis
which are just not credible and not
supported by the evidence at all so here
we come back again to Lee Hamilton who
we talked about on iran-contra and now
this is once again a very seasoned
politician who is a Democrat who is
attempting to suppress it sounds like
the thoughts the concerns of a fellow
Democrat well how do you explain this
well I think I think Lee Hamilton wanted
this unpleasant set of allegations known
as October Surprise to go away obviously
this is a case we have some pretty
slippery characters making the
allegations to begin with these are not
respectable men quote-unquote and you
have you have the respectable men from
George Bush through the Casey family too
dick Allen and judge Larry Silverman and
so forth denying any involvement
anything improper so you're sort of
you're put in a position but I think
congressman Hamilton has particular
problems with that is this idea that
honorable people or respectable people
might not tell you the truth but like
look Bob
we've got Oscar Arias who was the Nobel
Prize winner the moral president of
Costa Rica writing a letter saying look
we are concerned about drug trafficking
we have concerned about assassinations
he didn't say this but he clearly is one
of what we might call the respectable
man what happened what what was Lee
Hamilton afraid of that a somebody who
was associated with the CIA might be
convicted of drug trafficking and
assassination or what was he was trying
to do what bring information to the
American people be a Democrat I don't
quite get it well I don't quite get it
either
frankly but and I'm not defending I'm
not trying to defend why
congressman Hamilton would have written
that letter to Oscar Arias or why he
would have failed to get to the bottom
of the North Network and then the
iran-contra scandal and and I think why
he would accept essentially bogus alibis
for William Casey on something like the
October Surprise I do think that he that
he does see his his role as in a sense
defending the integrity of the
government and I said and that is a view
shared by many in Washington not just
people in Congress but also in
journalism that the American that is
best for the American people not to know
everything that yes some bad things
happen some things are done that maybe
or necessary they're kind of unsavory
but if the United States acknowledged
that these happen or admitted they
happened or expose that they happened if
the government exposed its own
wrongdoing that that would do
minish the Americans standing in the
world would cause the American public to
doubt the institutions of the government
as a journalist I disagree fervently
with that position I think it is the job
of journalism it's at its core to inform
the American people as best and honestly
and fairly as we can what's going on in
a sense we're like spies for the people
and we sort of get into the government
we should look around talk to a lot of
people then report back to the people
what we find out and I think if we do
that and if we do it well and and fairly
and honestly the public can then act
upon the government because it's armed
with the information of what the
government is doing if it approves it
can say it approves if it disapproves it
can say that but our role is to act is
that kind of honest broker for the
information to go back what we've seen
happen in recent years in Washington
it's not new but I think it's
accelerated is this idea that the press
is part of the elite that the press
understands what's going on but realizes
that the public isn't really ready for
it that the press should therefore
provide the information that would lead
the public to support the government in
its actions but not provide the
troubling evidence of that which might
show that the government has been has
gone seriously off track and I think in
the 80s we really failed the public as
an institution that is the press by by
failing to simply tell the truth as best
we could find it out we instead acted
more like press agents for the
government then we did act it Bob Perry
one final question which is sort of a
more general question about conflicting
stories information and why you would
believe one thing to not believe another
let me just ask you this we talked about
the iran-contra affair many people have
received their information on
iran-contra from the Christic Institute
Martha honey and 20 Aragon who were
associated with him now say no that was
a that was really quite unbelievable it
really wasn't to the point the material
wasn't correct it was exaggerated we
have Barbara hanukkah who wrote the
first October Surprise books I'm a
former aide Ronald Reagan aide and White
House aide says that George Bush was in
Paris not William Casey the counsel for
the the congressional committee for
investigating the October Surprise has
quite different view than you have
explained how you sort this out and why
you would believe Casey's in Paris or
that there's a good chance in George
Bush is and then why the crystals might
have not been telling the truth and say
a Bergen and honey and Costa Rica were
closer to the truth well I think it is
it has been very hard to figure out what
to believe that during this era we have
the people that you normally turn to to
tell you the truth or expect to get the
truth from the people in the US
government for instance had a long
record during this period of lying of
not telling the truth of covering things
up and then attacking people who try to
find out the truth that doesn't of
course mean that some of the characters
who show up and tell you all kinds of
wild stories are telling the truth
either I just think it requires a
tremendous skepticism toward everybody
there is some evidence is better than
other evidence however as I went through
in terms of like the so-called Bohemian
Grove alibi I think if you look at the
documentary evidence you would have no
choice but to conclude if you're an
objective person that Casey wasn't at
the Bohemian Grove the weekend the house
task force puts him there that doesn't
mean that I think he was in Madrid just
because John sheet Hashemi says so
either I do think one has to approach
these things as a journalist very very
skeptically but you don't jump on it on
one side or the other
what's a made you doubt what makes you
doubt
this very long story in The Village
Voice by Frank snaps saying that
everybody that had anything to do with
October surprise has been duped his
lying is grinding an axe that has more
to do their own desires then then say
what really happened in the October
Surprise why Frank separates this long
article he's got a decent reputation he
blew the lid on what happened in Vietnam
what what well I think that article I
thought was had a number of serious
inaccuracies that I knew about because I
knew many of the many of the people
involved he particularly accuses a very
able German correspondent Martin Killian
who was then working for dere Spiegel of
of acting in a way where he was
colluding with these witnesses that is
simply not supported by the evidence
it's it was sort of a counter conspiracy
theory that Frank's Neff was putting
forward to try to explain why a large
number of people would allege aspects to
October Surprise in a way you are stuck
with that problem if you don't believe
that there were some contacts between
Casey and the Iranians you have to then
explain why would so many people even in
many cases under oath put themselves in
jeopardy by saying there was snap tries
to construct a conspiracy theory that
goes the other way that somehow the
journalist got involved and and there
was all this somehow people were doing
this for whatever reasons there is no
evidence to support that there is simply
none the and in fact some evidence that
he puts forward about the timing of who
told frontline different parts of this
who were the witnesses who came forward
first he's completely wrong about
because I happened to been the reporter
on that I know that that he reverses the
order of events on some key on some key
details so I have to dismiss his account
and that but then again that is not to
say that I believe the these witnesses
who
October Surprise meetings but I just
don't think we can dismiss this kind of
body of evidence on equally shaky or
false evidence I think one has to look
at it as as at this point a story that
we don't know the full truth on I think
the evidence would suggest as the Senate
came down on that there probably were
some contacts between Casey and the
Iranians but that the evidence for a
deal to delay release of the hostage is
not supported in any way by the
available material at this time that I
think is a fair position based on what
we know but to go and just say nothing
happened
based on these alibis that don't hold up
either is is is sort of skewing the the
investigation in the opposite way and I
think one has to be just very careful in
this environment where propaganda were
disinformation where cover-ups have
become almost a currency of almost a
currency of public discourse in
Washington to jump to any conclusions to
either believe wild-eyed conspiracy
stories or to automatically debunk them
so I would say that we we have created a
real mess for ourselves as a democracy
when you cannot trust the government
and obviously the evidence of the last
12 years and in truly even before that
would lead any sane person to conclude
that the government's story must be
treated very skeptically but when you
can also not trust some of these fringe
people coming in with wild stories how
do you approach it how do you try to
piece it together then I think
fair-minded journalists who try to get
corroboration who try to look for
whatever documentary evidence might be
available
our role is extremely important if we
then if we jump to one side of the other
automatically
we further filed the process in a minute
in 60 seconds where do you think the
Christic Institute went wrong would
their investigate been they were
material well I think there were two
basic problems one was that they
pretended that they had dug up
information that other people had found
out and today in a sense falsified the
record by by putting themselves at the
center of everything when when they
really come into the game rather late
and and falsely claimed credit for much
that happened but worse than that was
the framework of their of their of their
allegations and that is that they had to
write out the US government because if
the US government were involved they
couldn't bring the suit so the Christic
pretended that this was a totally
private operation and even when people
who worked for the government were doing
things even when US equipment was being
shipped places it all had to be done
privately the US government was
operating maybe illegally but it was but
these actions were being taken by
representatives of the US government
from all over north to Ronald Reagan to
people in the Pentagon and the CIA who
are releasing the material in a sense
the Christian bought the cover story
that the White House was putting out
that this was this was a private
operation and for their own reasons they
bought the private operation cover story
it it wasn't a private operation it was
a government operation what would it
mean to us
democracy and what laws do you believe
might have been broken if in fact the
October Surprise or aspects of it some
of the key aspects of it were true
well again since I don't know really
what happened it's hard to go into that
I obviously if if there were any
significant interference with the
hostage negotiations that is if Casey
through his independent contacts with
the Iranians disrupted efforts to get
them out whether intentionally or not
that could be considered a serious act
of international treachery collaborating
with a terrorist state in a way that
goes counter to the interests of the
United States government there are a
number of laws including treason that
could apply however I think what what
seems to have happened more likely is
that Casey was seeking intelligence
about what the Iranians were up to what
they knew what they were likely to do
with Carter and he may have made these
independent contacts with them to
discuss their demands and so forth
whether that would cross a line into
breaking a law I don't know and I
wouldn't be prepared to say